The basic physical principle that drives the MRI scan draws upon the fact
that protons in hydrogen atoms align themselves in strong magnetic fields,
precessing or rotating around their axis at
a frequency which is proportional to the strength of the magnetic field.
If a disturbance is introduced into
a magnetic field at some particular location of the scanned volume,
the protons there change their orientation along the new field,
and once disturbance is removed,
they realign themselves back along the static field.
Since all protons in the area of interests are aligned in the same way,
they respond to the disturbance in unison,
exhibiting the effect that is called magnetic resonance.
Note that there are lots of nuances to this process,
but we will talk here only about what is most essential to the image analytics tasks.
If you would like to understand this better,
I will post links to some great resources at the end of this module.
Another thing that happens in an MRI scanner is a gradient field is
introduced to vary the resonance frequency of the protons spatially.
That is, if we are scanning from toes to heads or in an axial plane,
a weaker field might be applied closer to the feet and stronger field closer to the head.
After that, a radio frequency pulse is applied at
a specific resonant frequency of protons along the slice of interest.
The protons along this slice of 3D space respond
by changing their orientation or flipping.
More gradient fields are applied to differentiate
between locations in the selected slice of study.
As the RF pulse field and gradient fields are removed,
protons start relaxing and return to the original orientation.
Depending on the molecular structure of the material that protons are a part of,
they respond to the external field slightly differently.
It takes them different time to return to the original state.
As protons return to their original state,
they change the magnetic field around them,
and as we know,
the changes in magnetic field cause changes in the electrical field.
These changes in the electrical field can create
currents on the conducting contours and RF coils,
which are conveniently placed inside our MRI scanners that are
generating those dynamic fields are also measuring those induced currents.
This is the basic principle of operation of an MRI scanner.